[[Macbeth Essay - Planner]]
The Tragedy of Macbeth, written by William Shakespeare, is a play focusing on Macbeth's rise to power as King of Scotland, followed by his quick demise. The play starts with Macbeth, a well respected Thane and general under the King, beginning his rise as he is appointed Thane of Cawdor by Duncan, the King of Scotland. However, after he is prophesied by three witches to become King. In addition to being urged by his wife, Lady Macbeth, he murders Duncan to claim his throne. Macbeth's friend and Thane of Lochaber, Banquo, is also given prophesized by the witches that his descendants will become King. This causes Macbeth to be filled with paranoia, combined with Banquo's rising suspicion after Duncan's murder, Macbeth murders Banquo as well. As the play progresses, Macbeth and Lady Macbeth's guilt continues to persist. At the end of the play, Lady Macbeth commits suicide; and Macbeth was overthrown for his crimes/treason and was killed in a fight with Macduff, Thane of Fife. Guilt haunted Macbeth and Lady Macbeth throughout the play, up until their downfall.

---
After murdering Banquo, Macbeth, wracked by guilt, experiences hallucinations and becomes increasingly paranoid. From the play, "Enter the Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth’s place. Sweet remembrancer! Now, good digestion wait on appetite and health on both! May ’t please your Highness sit...Gentlemen, rise. His Highness is not well" (III.IV.XLII). This quote shows how Macbeth is experiencing hallucinations of Banquo's ghost, a physical manifestation of his guilt. This causes him paranoia and damages his mental state, marking the beginning of his downfall. In a soliloquy by Macbeth: "Is this a dagger which I see before me, the handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee. I have thee not, and yet I see thee still. Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible to feeling as to sight? Or art thou but a dagger of the mind, a false creation proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain? I see thee yet, in form as palpable As this which now I draw" (II.I.XLIV). This soliloquy shows Macbeth, hallucinating a bloody dagger, a visual representation showcasing his internal conflict with guilt, a conflict that progresses throughout the rest of the play until his inevitable death. Macbeth was tormented by his guilt until his death.

---
Lady Macbeth, while not immediately feeling guilt, is soon hit with the realization of her actions, which causes her mental state to decline until she commits suicide. In an exchange between Lady Macbeth's doctor and gentlewoman, "Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close...You see her eyes are open. Ay, but their sense are shut. What is it she does now? Look how she rubs her hands...Out, damned spot, out, I say! One. Two. Why then, ’tis time to do ’t. Hell is murky. Fie, my lord, fie, a soldier and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?" (V.I.XXI) This exchange shows how Lady Macbeth began to have guilt-ridden sleepwalks. She attempts to clean the blood of Duncan during these sleepwalks, showing her guilt in the murder, and her desire to right the wrong. "Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen (Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands, took off her life)" (V.VIII.LXXXII) This quote from Macduff reveals that Lady Macbeth committed suicide, which can be attributed to the mental state caused by her guilt. Lady Macbeth was driven to suicide by her guilt.

---
At the end, Macbeth and his wife were haunted by guilt which caused their downfall. Macbeth was riddled with guilt during his short reign as King, which lead to his failure. Lady Macbeth, while initially in denial, eventually too succumbed to the guilt, resulting in a rapidly declining mental state and eventual suicide. In conclusion, when racked with guilt, it is best to admit to your crimes, before it is too late, even if the outcome remained the same in the end, Macbeth and his wife would've died on a clean conscious.